evaṃ tāvat prākṛtaprakṣayānte
brāhme kalpe hyādime labdhajanmā |
brahmā bhūyastvatta evāpya vedān
sṛṣṭiṃ cakre pūrvakalpopamānām ||1||
evaṃ tāvat	in this manner then
prākṛta-prakṣaya-ante	at the close of the Prakrit Pralaya (total dissolution)
brāhme kalpe hi ādime	in Braahmakalpa which is the very first
labdha-janmā brahmā	having come into existence a new Brahmaa
bhūya: - tvatta:	again, from Thee alone
eva-āpya vedān	receiving the knowledge of the Vedas
sṛṣṭiṃ cakre	started creation
pūrva-kalpa-upamānām	in the same way as in the previous Kalpa
At the end of the Prakrit Pralaya, in the first Kalpa which is known as Braahma Kalpa, Brahmaa came into existence. He got the knowledge of the Vedas from Thee alone and began creation in the same way as in the previous Kalpas.
so'yaṃ caturyugasahasramitānyahāni
tāvanmitāśca rajanīrbahuśo nināya |
nidrātyasau tvayi nilīya samaṃ svasṛṣṭai-
rnaimittikapralayamāhurato'sya rātrim ||2||
sa: -ayaṃ	that this (Brahmaa)
catu: -yuga-sahsra-mitāni-	over a period of 1000 chaturyugas
ahāni	(which are his) day
tāvat-mitā:-	and as many
ca rajanī:	nights
bahuśa: nināya	many times having spent
nidrati-asau	he sleeps
tvayi nilīya	merging in Thee
samaṃ svasṛṣṭai:-	along with all his creation
naimittika-pralayam-āhu: -	(this period) is called Naimittika Pralaya
ata: -asya rātrim	which is his night time
One thousand Chaturyugaas make one day for this Brahma, and an equal duration is his night. During his day time he creates and at night he sleeps. His night is called the Naimittika Pralaya, when along with his creation he merges in Thee. Thus he spent many days and nights.
asmādṛśāṃ punaraharmukhakṛtyatulyāṃ
sṛṣṭiṃ karotyanudinaṃ sa bhavatprasādāt |
prāgbrāhmakalpajanuṣāṃ ca parāyuṣāṃ tu
suptaprabodhanasamāsti tadā'pi sṛṣṭi: ||3||
asmādṛśāṃ puna: -	like we people (the mortals) again
aha: -mukha-kṛtya-tulyāṃ	at the beginning of the day's morning duties
sṛṣṭiṃ karoti-anudinaṃ sa	he (Brahmaa) does the work of creation every day
bhavat-prasādāt	by Thy grace
prāk-brāhmakalpa-januṣāṃ	earlier than the BraahmaKalpa those who were born
ca para-āyuṣāṃ tu	and for the eternal souls, however
supta-prabodhana-samā-asti	(creation) is like waking up from sleep
tadā-api sṛṣṭi:	even when it is creation
Brahmaa, by Thy grace performs creation every day just as humans like us wake up in the morning and start our daily duties. For those who were born before the Braahma Kalpa, and for the eternal souls, being born in the new Kalpa is like getting up from sleep.
pañcāśadabdamadhunā svavayordharūpa-
mekaṃ parārdhamativṛtya hi vartate'sau |
tatrāntyarātrijanitān kathayāmi bhūman
paścāddināvataraṇe ca bhavadvilāsān ||4||
pañcāśat-abdam-adhunā	fifty years now
sva-vaya: -ardha-rūpam-	his half life span
ekaṃ parārdham-	(which is) one paraardha
ativṛtya hi vartate-asau	having crossed, indeed, remains he (Brahmaa)
tatra-antya-rātri-janitān	there, at the last of those nights, what took place
kathayāmi	I will narrate
bhūman	O Infinite Being!
paścāt-dina-avataraṇe ca	and after that, at the beginning of the (next) day
bhavat-vilāsān	(regarding) Thy sportive activities (I shall narrate)
O Infinite Being! Brahmaa ruling over the present cycle has now completed fifty years of his life,which is known as one paraardha. I shall now narrate Thy sportive activities during the previous night of Brahma and at the beginning of the next morning of the present paraardha.
dināvasāne'tha sarojayoni:
suṣuptikāmastvayi sannililye |
jaganti ca tvajjaṭharaṃ samīyu-
stadedamekārṇavamāsa viśvam ||5||
dina-avasāne-atha	then, at the end of the day
sarojayoni:	the lotus born (Brahmaa)
suṣupti-kāma: -	to sleep desiring
tvayi sannililye	in Thee merged
jaganti ca	and the worlds (also)
tvat-jaṭharaṃ samīyu: -	in Thy abdomen, merged
tat-idam-eka-arṇavam-āsa viśvam	that this universe became one ocean
O Lord! At the end of a creative day of Brahmaa, desirous of sleep, he along with the world merged in Thy abdomen in subtle form. At that time the whole universe became one big ocean.
tavaiva veṣe phaṇirāji śeṣe
jalaikaśeṣe bhuvane sma śeṣe |
ānandasāndrānubhavasvarūpa:
svayoganidrāparimudritātmā ||6||
tava-eva veṣe	in Thy form alone
phaṇirāji śeṣe	(who is) on the king of serpents, sleeping
jala-eka-śeṣe bhuvane	with nothing but waters as the universe
sma śeṣe	(Thou) reclined (on the serpent bed)
ānanda-sāndra-anubhava-svarūpa:	of the nature of giving experience saturated bliss
sva-yoga-nidrā-parimudrita-ātmā	(Thou) in yoga slumber engaging Thyself
O Lord! At the time when the whole universe was reduced to causal waters, Thou reclined on Aadi Shesha, the king of serpents who is also one of Thy manifestations. Thou were absorbed in yoga nidraa, in a state of pure bliss.
kālākhyaśaktiṃ pralayāvasāne
prabodhayetyādiśatā kilādau |
tvayā prasuptaṃ parisuptaśakti-
vrajena tatrākhilajīvadhāmnā ||7||
kāla-ākhya-śaktiṃ	(Thy) power called Time
pralaya-avasāne prabodhaya-	at the end of the deluge awaken me'
iti-ādiśatā	thus commanding, it is said
kila-ādau	at the beginning of (the pralaya)
tvayā prasuptaṃ	Thou slept
parisupta-śakti-vrajena tatra	in whom all the energies had become latent, at that time
akhila jīvadhāmnā	(and who is) the abode of all jivas
Thou commanded Thy power which is called Time to awaken Thee at the end of the deluge (Pralaya). Then, at the beginning of the Pralaya Thou resorted to sleep with all the various energies and the jeevas merged in Thee.
caturyugāṇāṃ ca sahasramevaṃ
tvayi prasupte punaradvitīye |
kālākhyaśakti: prathamaprabuddhā
prābodhayattvāṃ kila viśvanātha ||8||
caturyugāṇāṃ ca sahasram-	and for a thousand chaturygas
evaṃ tvayi prasupte	thus Thou having slept
puna: -advitīye	then with no one else besides Thou
kāla-ākhya-śakti:	the power of Time
prathama-prabuddhā	first waking up
prabodhayat-tvāṃ kila	awakened Thee, it is said
viśvanātha	O Lord of the Universe!
O Unparalleled Lord of the universe! When thus during the Naimittika Pralaya consisting of a thousand chaturyugas, Thou had slept, the power of time (Kaala Shakti) woke up first and awakened Thee from Thy slumber.
vibudhya ca tvaṃ jalagarbhaśāyin
vilokya lokānakhilān pralīnān |
teṣveva sūkṣmātmatayā nijānta: -
sthiteṣu viśveṣu dadātha dṛṣṭim ||9||
vibudhya ca tvaṃ	and after waking up Thou
jala-garbha-śāyin	who were reclining in the causal waters
vilokya	beholding
lokān-akhilān pralīnān	all the worlds merged (in Thee)
teṣu-eva sūkṣma-ātmatayā	on those (worlds) (which were )in subtle form
nijānta: - sthiteṣu	inside Thee only residing
viśveṣu	on all of them
dadātha dṛṣṭiṃ	(Thou) cast Thy glance
O Lord! Thou who were reclining in the causal waters, on waking up saw all the worlds merged in Thyself in subtle form. Thou then cast Thy glance on all of them.
tatastvadīyādayi nābhirandhrā-
dudañcitaṃ kiṃcana divyapadmam |
nilīnaniśśeṣapadārthamālā-
saṃkṣeparūpaṃ mukulāyamānam ||10||
tata: tvadīyāt-	then, from Thy
ayi	O Lord!
nābhirandhrāt-	navel hole
udañcitaṃ	emerged
kiñcana divya-padmam	a wonderful brilliant lotus
nilīna-niśśeṣa-padārtha-mālā-	all the things which had remained merged in Thee
saṃkṣepa-rūpaṃ	contained in subtle form
mukulāyamānam	which was in the shape of a bud
Then, O Lord! There emerged from Thy naval hole a wonderful divine lotus in the form of a bud, containing in subtle form all the worlds that remained merged in Thee.
tadetadaṃbhoruhakuḍmalaṃ te
kalevarāt toyapathe prarūḍham |
bahirnirītaṃ parita: sphuradbhi:
svadhāmabhirdhvāntamalaṃ nyakṛntat ||11||
tat-etad-ambhoruha-kuḍmalaṃ	that aforesaid lotus bud
te kalevarāt	(originating from) Thy body (navel)
toya-pathe prarūḍham	rising in the causal waters
bahi: - nirītaṃ	and coming out above (the waters)
parita: sphuradbhi: svadhāmabhi:-	by its brilliance spreading all around
dhvāntam-alaṃ nyakṛntat	completely removed the darkness
O Lord! that divine lotus bud, which originated from Thy body, rose above the causal waters and with its brilliance, removed the surrounding darkness completely.
saṃphullapatre nitarāṃ vicitre
tasmin bhavadvīryadhṛte saroje |
sa padmajanmā vidhirāvirāsīt
svayaṃprabuddhākhilavedarāśi: ||12||
saṃphulla-patre	in the fully blossomed petals
nitarāṃ vicitre	of the most wonderful
tasmin	in that
bhavat-vīryadhṛte	(which was) supported by Thy yogic prowess
saroje	in that lotus
sa padmajanmā vidhi: -	the lotus born Brahmaa (the creator)
āvirāsīt	appeared
svayaṃ-prabuddha-akhila-veda-rāśi:	with all the Vedas self manifested in him
O Lord! In the fully blossomed petals of the wonderful lotus, which was supported by Thy yogic prowess, the lotus born Brahmaa (the creator) appeared with all the Vedas self manifested in him.
asmin parātman nanu pādmakalpe
tvamitthamutthāpitapadmayoni: |
anantabhūmā mama rogarāśiṃ
nirundhi vātālayavāsa viṣṇo ||13||
asmin	in this
parātman	O Supreme Being
nanu pādmakalpe	Paadma Kalpa
tvam-ittham-	Thou in this manner
utthāpita-padmayoni:	caused to originate the lotus born Brahmaa
anantabhūmā	O Thou of infinite glory!
mama rogarāśiṃ nirundhi	pray, eradicate my hoards of ailments
vātālayavāsa viṣṇo	O Vishnu Dweller of Guruvaayur!
O Supreme Lord of incomprehensible powers, in this age known as the Paadma Kalpa, Thou thus brought into existence the Creator Brahmaa. O Lord Vishnu! who has manifested in the temple of Guruvaayur, please eradicate my ailments.